Luau Recap: August 2021 (#64)
Roblox/luau: docs/_posts/2021-08-31-luau-recap-august-2021.md

---
layout: single
title:  "Luau Recap: August 2021"
---

Luau is our new language that you can read more about at [https://roblox.github.io/luau](https://roblox.github.io/luau).

[Cross-posted to the [Roblox Developer Forum](https://devforum.roblox.com/t/luau-recap-august-2021/).]

## Editor features

The Roblox Studio [Luau-Powered Autocomplete & Language Features Beta](https://devforum.roblox.com/t/script-editor-luau-powered-autocomplete-language-features-beta) that our team has been working on has finally been released!
Be sure to check that out and leave your feedback for things we can improve.

To support that feature, a lot of work went into:
* Improving fault-tolerant parser recovery scenarios
* Storing additional information in the AST, including comments, better location information and partial syntax data
* Tracking additional information about types and their fields, including tracking definition locations, function argument names, deprecation state and custom Roblox-specific tags

> * Updating reflection information to provide more specific Instance types and correct previously missing/wrong type annotations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Updating reflection information to provide more specific `Instance` types and correct previously missing or wrong type annotations
```

> * Hybrid typechecking mode to try and infer types even in scripts with no typechecking enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Hybrid typechecking mode which tries to infer types even in scripts with no typechecking enabled
```

> * Support for types that are attached to the DataModel tree elements to provide instance member information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support for types that are attached to the `DataModel` tree elements to provide instance member information
```

> * Placing limits to finish typechecking in a finite space/time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Placing limits to finish typechecking in a finite space/time
```

* Adding Autocomplete API for the Roblox Studio to get location-based entity information and appropriate suggestions
* Additional type inference engine improvements and fixes

> While our work continues to respond to the feedback we receive, our team members are shifting focus to add generic functions, extend Parallel Luau, improve Lua VM performance, provide documentation and support typechecking of Lua metatable-based OOP constructs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While our work continues to respond to the feedback we receive, our team members are shifting focus to add generic functions, improve type refinements in conditionals, extend Parallel Luau, improve Lua VM performance and provide documentation. 
```

## Typechecking improvements

Type constraint resolver now remembers constraints placed on individual table fields.

This should fix false-positive errors reported after making sure the optional table field is present:
```lua
--!strict
local t: {value: number?} = {value = 2}

if t.value then
    local v: number = t.value -- ok
end
```

And it can also refine field type to a more specific one:
```lua
--!strict
local t: {value: string|number} = {value = 2}

if type(t.value) == "number" then
    return t.value * 2 -- ok
end
```

Like before, combining multiple conditions using 'and' and 'not' is also supported.

---

Constructing arrays with different values for optional/union types are now also supported for individual table fields and in functions call arguments:
```lua
--!strict
type Foo = {x: number | string, b: number?}

local function foo(l: {Foo}) end

foo({
	{x = 1234567},
	{x = "hello"}, -- now ok
})

type Bar = {a: {Foo}}

local foos: Bar = {a = {
	{x = 1234567},
	{x = "hello", b = 2}, -- now ok
}}
```

---

Finally, we have fixed an issue with Roblox class field access using indexing like `part["Anchored"] = true`.

## Linter improvements

> 

Reviewer: Did we already announce the "duplicate condition" lint?

Author: Yes, that was last month

We have added a new linter check for duplicate local variable definitions.

It is created to find duplicate names in cases like these:
```lua
local function foo(a1, a2, a2) -- Function argument 'a2' already defined on column 24
local a1, a2, a2 = f() -- Variable 'a2' already defined on column 11

local bar = {}
function bar:test(self) -- Function argument 'self' already defined implicitly
```

Our UnknownType linter warning was extended to check for correct class names passed into `FindFirstChildOfClass`, `FindFirstChildWhichIsA`, `FindFirstAncestorOfClass` and `FindFirstAncestorWhichIsA` funcitons.

## Performance improvements

We have added an optimization to 'table.unpack' for 2x performance improvement.

> One extra optimization for tables is to predict required table size based on fields that are assigned to it in the code after construction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One extra optimization for tables is to predict required table capacity based on fields that are assigned to it in the code after construction. This can reduce the need to reallocate tables.
```

Another optimization this month changes the location and rate of garbage collection invocations.
We now try to avoid calling GC during the script execution and perform all the work in the GcJob part of the frame (it could be seen in the performance profiler). When possible, we can now skip that job in the frame completely, if we have some memory budget available.

## Other improvements

For general stability improvements we fixed a crash when strange types like '`nil??`' are used and when users have their own global functions named '`require`'.

> Indexing table with an incompatible type will now show squiggly error lines under the index instead of the whole expression, which was a bit misleading.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indexing a table with an incompatible type will now show squiggly error lines under the index instead of the whole expression, which was a bit misleading.
```

---
layout: single
title:  "Luau Recap: August 2021"
---

> Luau is our new language that you can read more about at [https://roblox.github.io/luau](https://roblox.github.io/luau).

Reviewer 2: old link. can we fix the link and update the template for this?

Author: Fixed the link.
We don't have a template for these recaps and I took the wrong version as base (June post).
